Remarks on Trump’s bigotry at the Black Women’s Agenda Symposium
“Hello, B-W-A. I thank you all for that warm welcome. There’s nowhere I’d rather be than right here with all of you this morning.
Please everyone be seated. This is such a great opportunity to lift up the work that so many of you have done for years — your organizations, individually — and I am grateful for it because it has helped to guide me in a lot of the work that I’ve been privileged to do.
I want to thank Gwen Hess for her introduction. I want to acknowledge, it’s always great to see a woman serve as president in any setting.
I want to congratulate today’s honorees. Everyone is so deserving of this recognition. I also want to acknowledge a few others. We have some fierce members of Congress with us today, women whom I admire, who have been my colleagues and friends and with whom I am looking forward to continuing our work: Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee, Congresswoman Gwen Moore, Congresswoman Yvette Clarke, Congresswoman Stacey Plaskett.
And I want to give a special shout out to Congresswoman Joyce Beatty. When I saw Joyce recently, she said, ‘Well, you are coming, aren’t you?’ And I said, ‘I’m working hard to get it set.’ And I am so proud that it did work out, and I thank Joyce for that extra push.
I also want to acknowledge someone who had such a profound effect on my life, in every way, someone whom I admire and love, Marian Wright Edelman. This audience is filled with longtime friends and people I went to Wellesley College with that became life-long friends to me, and so many of you who have been on the front lines — everyone associated with The Black Women’s Agenda, I’m thrilled to be with you. I’m thrilled to be associated with you. I’m also thrilled to be back on the campaign trail. As the world knows, I was a little under the weather recently. The good news is, my pneumonia finally got some Republicans interested in women’s health.
Looking back, I know, I should have followed my doctor’s orders to rest, but, my instinct was to push through it. That is what women do every single day, and I felt no different. Life has shown us that we do have to work harder at the office while still bearing most of the responsibilities at home — that we always need to keep going because our families and our communities count on us. And I think it is more than fair to say, that black women have an even tougher road.
And you, your daughters, your granddaughters — I was pleased to meet Gwen’s beautiful granddaughter earlier — leave the house every morning, put on that game face that we all practice, and enter a society that consistently challenges your worth. With the images you see, the lower pay that so many take home, that try to silence your voices and break your spirits; yet, you remain fierce in the face of these challenges. We see that every day in the businesses you start, the art you create, the children you teach and the communities and organizations you lead. While your stories are often missing from the history books — make no mistake — you are the change makers, the path breakers, and the ground shakers. And, you are proof that yes, indeed, black girl magic is real.
Now, I’ve been blessed to see this magic’s influence on kids and communities up close for decades, starting with my first job after law school working with Marian at the Children’s Defense Fund. Marian’s belief was that every single child had worth and potential and deserved the opportunity to live up to their god potential with the tools and the support that every child needs. And that if we just improve the odds a bit for those suffering in poverty, they could flourish. So she led our team into some very poor communities. We met kids who had dropped out of school because they couldn’t afford textbooks or transportation. Some didn’t have decent clothes and stayed home to avoid being humiliated in class. Some had untreated medical and dental problems that made it practically impossible for them to learn. Those stories really hurt my heart.
But Marian always believed we could deliver help and hope if we never ever gave up. So she taught us ways to think creatively, as well as strategically– to take our advocacy and turn it into action and results. She sent me to New Bedford, Massachusetts, to go door to door looking for children who weren’t in school. That was back before we had a legal requirement that every child, regardless of disability, deserved to get an education. I met a young girl in New Bedford and sat and talked with her on the small back porch of her house. She told me how badly she wanted to learn, but couldn’t because schools weren’t accessible or welcoming. So Marian had us get to work and change that.
We gathered evidence and built a coalition. We helped convince Congress to ensure access to education for all students with disabilities. Marian showed me that to drive real progress, you have to change both hearts and laws. You need both understanding and action. And there is no question, I’m here today because of her example. I also want to recognize pioneers like Barbara Jordan and Shirley Chisholm, who sacrificed and struggled so that I and so many other women running for office could soar. I’m here because of friends and colleagues, like Donna Brazile, Reverend Leah Daugherty and Congresswoman Marcia Fudge — three black women who ran the Democratic National Convention in July. It was a great four days.
It goes to show that black women deserve more than a seat at the table. It’s past time you had a fair chance to run the meeting. And let’s be clear: I would not be the Democratic nominee for President of the United States were it not for black women like all of you who made noise at the polls this year in support of our campaign — who did surrogate events, went to barber shops and beauty salons and cafes, got on local radio and local TV to make the case. We’ve come far together.
And as I said yesterday in North Carolina, I’m going to close my campaign the way I began my career all those years ago at the Children’s Defense Fund, and the way that I will serve as your president should I have the great honor of being elected: I will be focused on opportunities for kids and fairness for families. The American people deserve something to vote for, not just against.
And together — together, we are going to make this a freer, fairer and stronger nation.
We’re going to fight for the parents struggling to balance family and work and push for affordable child care, paid family leave, and yes, finally, equal pay for women.
We’ll fight for the young girls who want a fair chance in life, which is why we’ll make universal pre-k available so that every child — no matter what they look like or where they live — can rise up and be prepared to fulfill their academic destiny.
We are also going to do a lot to emphasize STEM education, particularly for girls and women, and I thank the agenda for making that a priority!
We’ll fight for the entrepreneur who said that more businesses die in the parking lots of banks than anywhere else, which is why we’re going to increase access to capital, and we are going to help African American women continue to represent the fastest growing segment of women-owned businesses in America right now.
We are going to invest in communities that have been left out and left behind. Urban reinvestment and restructuring that is going to give more people decent housing, access to jobs, the transportation to get to those jobs, rural communities that are too often ignored and denied the services they need. I am a fan of Jim Clyburn’s ‘10-20-30’ plan. I am going to do everything I can to push that forward.
We’ll remember the pain of the Mothers of the Movement and fight for a criminal justice system that actually delivers justice and a future where everyone has respect for the law and is respected by the law. And we are going to pass common-sense reforms to keep guns out of the hands of dangerous people and keep our communities safe.
We’ll remember the families neglected in Flint and take action so that no child’s life is ever put at risk again when brushing their teeth or drinking a glass of water at dinner. We’ll advocate for everyone concerned about their parents and grandparents as they age, and lift up caregivers and home care workers so older Americans can live in comfort and with dignity.
And we’re going to protect and enhance Social Security, which is the main source of income for older women. We’ll stand-by-side to make sure that all of our rights are respected and protected – civil rights and women’s rights, LGBT rights, worker’s rights and, of course, voting rights.
We are coming together at a pivotal moment for our country. Now I do believe that every election is important. But this one feels different, doesn’t it? That’s because it is. The next 53 days will shape the next 50 years. The future of our children and grandchildren hangs in the balance.
On one hand, we have my opponent, Donald Trump, and in recent weeks, he’s tried to restrain himself and clean up his image. But as Maya Angelou once said, ‘When someone shows you who they are, believe them the first time.’ And we know who Donald is. For five years, he has led the birther movement to de-legitimize our first black president. His campaign was founded on this outrageous lie. There is no erasing it in history.
Just yesterday, Trump again refused to say with his own words that the president was born in the United States. Donald’s advisors had the temerity to say, ‘He’s doing the country a ‘service’ by pushing these lies.’ No, he isn’t. He’s feeding into the worst impulses — the bigotry and bias — that lurks in our country.
Barack Obama was born in America, plain and simple. And Donald Trump owes him and the American people an apology. So, my friends, there is no ‘new’ Donald Trump. There never will be. Donald Trump looks at President Obama after eight years as our president. He still doesn’t see him as an American.
Think of how dangerous that is. Imagine a person in the Oval Office who traffics in conspiracy theories and refuses to let them go – no matter what the facts are. Imagine someone who distorts the truth to fit a very narrow view of the world. Imagine a president who sees someone who doesn’t look like him, and doesn’t agree with him, and thinks, ‘That person must not be a real American.’
Donald Trump is unfit to be President of the United States. We cannot become insensitive to what he says and what he stirs up. We can’t just accept this.We’ve got to stand up to it. If we don’t, it won’t stop.
In addition to the president, Donald Trump looks at a distinguished federal judge, born in Indiana, and he sees a Mexican, not an American. He looks at a Gold Star family and sees them as Muslims, not patriotic Americans. He looks at women and decides how our looks rate on a scale of one to 10. I look at America, I see everyone. I see our great diversity, which is one of our core strengths, not our burden. We know who Donald Trump is. Now it’s time for our country to show who we are and reject his divisive vision.
That’s why this election is so important. As Michelle Obama said at the Democratic Convention, ‘When we go to the polls this November, the real choice isn’t between a Democrat or Republican.’ It’s about who will have the power to shape our children’s lives for the next four years. It’s also about the kind of country we want to be, and what we want to leave behind for future generations.
We are at our best when every person gets to share in our nation’s promise, contribute to its progress. ‘Stronger Together’ is not just our campaign slogan. It’s the guiding principle for the future we need to build. So Americans, we need to ask themselves: Are we going to make our economy work for everyone or just for those at the top? Are we going to bring people together or pit Americans against each other and rip our country apart? Are we going to work with our allies to keep us safe or are we going to put a loose cannon in charge who would risk everything that generations of Americans have worked so hard to build?
Now in many ways, the profound choice is up to the women in this room. African American women turned out to vote more than any other group of Americans in 2012. This year, once again, you have your hands on the wheel of history and you can write the next chapter of the American story.
Keep up the great work with your Four for 4’ campaign. Make sure we get as many people registered and then to the polls as we possibly can. People say to me all time, ‘I just — I don’t know what to do about Trump and his supporters and the things he says and inciting violence and all of the terrible activities that are happening this election year.’
Well, here’s what we can do. Let’s reject the cynicism, the bullying, the divisive rhetoric that my opponent uses to make us afraid of each other, afraid of our differences, afraid of our future. I know that all of us in this room are ready to stand up against this … to rise up for our families, our communities, but most importantly, to show up at the polls this November.
With our power and strength, I know — I believe this, or I would not be standing here before you, I would not have run again for president, I would not deal with all the incoming brickbats that are hurled my way if I did not in my heart believe with every fiber of my being that together we can build a future where, yes, love trumps hate.
Thank you very much. Thank you.”

Remarks in Cincinnati on gun control and national security
“So I have stood up to the gun lobby for years, which is why they are running all of these ads against me. And I will stand up to them as president.” 
Thank you so much! Wow, it is great to be back in Cincinnati. What a beautiful night on the banks of this magnificent river. I am grateful to all of you. I am thrilled to be here with my dear friends Mark and Gabby, and with all of you, because there are just eight days left in what is the most important election of our lifetimes.
Are you ready to work hard in this election and win it? Are you ready to send Ted Strickland to the United States Senate? I’ve known Ted a long time. He is a champion for workers and families. He knows that Ohio needs more good jobs with rising wages. And he is the kind of person who will actually work to get things done, breaking through the gridlock in Washington. And this is important: unlike his opponent, Ted Strickland has never been afraid to stand up to Donald Trump.
I also want to thank Mayor John Cranley and State Representative Alicia Reece and all the other elected officials, including my friend, the Secretary of State Alison Lundergan Grimes, from across the river in Kentucky. And we are so fortunate to have two other champions for American families with us today. I am awed by the courage and commitment that both Mark and Gabby bring to their work, to do everything they can to help save lives in America.
You know, as Gabby says every day when she goes out, fight, fight, fight. And fight she does. She fights to make sure that we save lives and we prevent injuries and we do it together – to end the epidemic of gun violence that threatens our children, our fellow men and women, our country. And Gabby and Mark know something very important: there is a big majority of Americans, including a majority of gun owners, to stand behind and achieve commonsense gun safety measures. And I am looking forward to working with them as their partner.
You know, you go through life, you go through the campaigns, there are ups and there are downs. And my mother, who had a really difficult life, she told me something that has stayed with me and certainly has come in handy in this campaign. Everybody gets knocked down; what matters is whether you get back up. And throughout this campaign, I have stayed focused on one thing: you – your lives, your families, the problems that keep you up at night. Because that’s really what this election is all about. It’s not about the noise and the distractions. It’s about what kind of country we want for our kids, and what kind of president can help get us there.
I have so much that I want to do with you on behalf of Cincinnati and Ohio and America. And whether or not I get the chance to serve you really depends upon what happens in this election.
Now, earlier today, I was up at Kent State, a great university, and I told them about some of the reasons why I think it’s really important to get everybody out to vote in this election. But I started by saying that there’s this new email story about – why in the world the FBI would decide to jump into an election without evidence of any wrongdoing with just days to go. That’s a really good question. But I want you to know – look, I’ve said repeatedly I made a mistake, I’m not making any excuses, but I will tell you this. If they want to look at some more emails of one of my staffers, by all means, go ahead, look at them. And I know they will reach the same conclusion they reached when they looked at my emails last year, right? It wasn’t even a close call, and I think most people have moved on. They’re looking and focused on, okay, who is going to be the next president and commander-in-chief?
Did any of you see the debates? Any of you see the debates? Well, I am – I got a little bit of a chance. I did stand there for four and a half hours with Donald Trump, proving conclusively I have the stamina to do the job. But I did occasionally get a chance to ask people to take a look at my 30 years of public service, my plans for our country, what Tim Kaine and I have said we want to do, and then weigh that against my opponent, what he’s done and said. I am running against someone who says he doesn’t understand why we can’t use nuclear weapons. He actually said, “Then why are we making them?” He wants more countries to have nuclear weapons. He’s mentioned Japan, South Korea, even Saudi Arabia. Now, if you are hoping that he might surround himself with good people who would stop his crazy ideas, remember this. When he was asked who he consults with on foreign policy, Donald Trump said he didn’t need to consult because, and I quote, “I have a very good brain.” He said he knows more about ISIS than our generals do. [Booing.] No, Donald, you don’t. And of course, the people that Donald Trump has around him include two men whose activities are also reportedly being investigated because of their ties to Russia, Vladimir Putin, and their allies.
So in these last days, let’s not get distracted from the real choice in this election. Donald Trump has proven himself to be temperamentally unfit and totally unqualified to be president and commander-in-chief.
I have to tell you, it does not give me any pleasure saying that. It’s not a small thing. I have watched and known a lot of the people who have run for president, both Republicans and Democrats. And look, I’ve had my disagreements with Republicans. I might have disagreed on policies or principles, but I never doubted their fitness to serve in this office. Donald Trump is different, and that’s why there is so much at stake in this election. He has a dark and divisive vision for America that could tear our country apart. Abraham Lincoln understood a house divided against itself cannot stand, and that was over the greatest of challenges – the challenge posed by slavery – and we fought a civil war. But we also have to take stock of how divided we are today, the kinds of divisions that need to be healed to bring people together.
I will tell you this. I want to bring not just Democrats, but Republicans and Independents, people who vote for me and people who vote against me, together. Because I have a very different vision of America. Instead of dark and divisive, it’s hopeful and inclusive. It’s big-hearted, not small-minded. It is about lifting people up, not putting them down. It’s a vision that says, and I believe this with all my heart, we are stronger together. And America is great because America is good. Never forget that. Yes, we have our flaws; of course, we’re only humans. But what we have done over the course of our history to keep widening the circle of opportunity and equality and freedom is unlike any other place in the history of the world. So we want an America where women are respected – where our veterans are honored – where parents and families are supported and workers are paid fairly. And we believe in an America where marriage is a right, and discrimination is wrong. An America that leads in the world and lives up to our values, where everyone counts, everyone has a place, and the American dream is big enough for everybody. So the choice could not be clearer and the stakes could not be higher.
When I was at Kent State talking about the threats that Donald Trump poses to our national security, I was really struck. It was a very big crowd, and it was primarily students. And I thought to myself, well, I’m not going to give a rah-rah speech because I really want to talk about what this means to national security. And I was introduced by a gentleman named Bruce Blair, a former Air Force officer in charge of the nuclear codes and keys. A launch officer. And he came out for me, along with now more than 30 launch officers, and basically they said, we cannot support Donald Trump because he should never, ever be near the nuclear codes and keys.
And even the prospect of an actual nuclear war doesn’t seem to bother him. “Good luck. Enjoy yourselves, folks,” is what he had to say about a potential nuclear conflict in Asia. I wonder if he even knows that a single – a single – nuclear warhead can kill millions of people? That is why dozens of retired nuclear launch officers took the unprecedented step of saying that Donald should, and I quote, “not have his finger on the button.” And when it comes to handling a crisis, we’ve seen in this campaign that Donald Trump loses his cool at the slightest provocation – when he’s gotten a tough question from a reporter, or when he’s challenged in a debate, or when he sees a protestor at a rally, when he’s confronted by his own words. So imagine him in the Oval Office facing a real crisis. [Cries of “No!”] Imagine him plunging us into a war because somebody got under his very thin skin. I hope you’ll think about that when you cast your vote in this election. Think about what it takes to lead in a very complicated world, and in whose hands you want to put the safety of our children and grandchildren.
And think about the difference between electing a president who will do nothing and president who will tackle the epidemic of gun violence in America. As Gabby knows so well, 33,000 Americans a year are killed guns. Thousands more are injured. It’s an average of 90 people a day dying. Here in Ohio more people are killed by guns than die in car crashes. We have seen moviegoers gunned down in theaters, little children killed in their classrooms, clubgoers massacred in Orlando, nine faithful people murdered at Bible study in Charleston, South Carolina. And we’ve seen far too many young African American men and women killed by gun violence, which is now the leading cause of death for young black men. And when we think about that, we think of Dontre Hamilton or Jordan Davis or Trayvon Martin and others. I’ve had the great honor of getting to know their mothers, who have turned their grief into action and their mourning into a movement.
But here’s what I want to say. If anything else in our country were killing as many people, people of good faith, people who believe, like we do, in the Second Amendment, people who own guns, people who go hunting, people who are collectors, we would say, hey, wait a minute. This can’t go on. We need comprehensive background checks to close the gun show loophole, close the online loophole. And we know here in Ohio a majority of gun owners support these common-sense steps to prevent gun violence because they know we can respect the Second Amendment and keep our kids and communities safe at the same time. And we need to keep guns out of the hands suspected terrorists. If you are too dangerous to fly, you are too dangerous to buy a gun, period.
And look. There is a very clear difference. Donald Trump won’t stand up to the gun lobby. He’s sold out to them. In fact, the gun lobby is spending more on ads to get Donald Trump elected than any other group, more than $7 million in Ohio alone. And in return, Donald Trump has promised to repeat President Obama’s actions to strengthen criminal background checks. Donald says guns should be allowed in nightclubs that serve alcohol. He’s even said, on his very first day in office, he would require every school in America to let people carry guns into our classrooms. How can anyone think our schools would be safer with more guns?
So I have stood up to the gun lobby for years, which is why they are running all of these ads against me. And I will stand up to them as president. I will work with Gabby and Mark and Americans for Responsible Solutions to pass common sense reforms because we’ve got to keep guns out of the wrong hands and help save lives.
I will also get up every day in the White House working my heart out for you, whatever I can do to knock down barriers to empower people, to get the economy working for everybody, not just those at the top. That’s how I was raised. I was raised to believe that if you work hard – and I believe in hard work – you should be able to get ahead and stay ahead in America. And I will never ever quit on you. When I tell you I’m going to try to do something that will make a positive difference in your life, I don’t care what the political or other barriers are. We’re going to find a way over, under, around, or through until we get it done. I’ve been fighting for families and underdogs my entire life, and I’m not stopping now. Remember, when our opponents go low, we go high. We’re not going to be distracted. We’re not going to be knocked off course. We know how much this election matters. And everything all of you can do between now and the time that the polls close is going to really count.
Now, the Donald Trump campaign strategy is pretty simple. They’ve announced it. Their strategy is: get women to stay home, get young people to stay home, and get people of color to stay home. It’s all part of his scorched-earth campaign, but it actually adds up to more than half of our whole population when you stop to think about it. And it goes against everything we stand for. So if you’re as upset as I am by the campaign that he has run, the things he has said, insulting not just women but immigrants, Latinos, African Americans, prisoners of war, Muslims, veterans, the military – I mean, the list goes on and on. It’s almost impossible to understand how somebody could run for president who seems not to like America as much as he does.
So you know the best way to stop him: by showing up with the biggest turnout in history. We need more Americans to vote. And I think we have a chance to get more Americans from all walks of life to vote because we’re already seeing record turnout. Twenty-three million people have already voted in this election. And more than one million of them are right here in Ohio. There is no doubt if we vote, we win. So, please, if you haven’t voted early, please do so. And please get your friends and your family, everybody you know to vote. Take people to vote with you. Try to help those who might have a little problem getting there.
Make sure that everybody you know understands early voting has begun. And you can go to iwillvote.com to find your nearest early voting location because, make no mistake, whatever issue you care about – I’ve only mentioned a few tonight, but whatever issue you care about is on the ballot. Now, it may be my name and my opponent’s name, but where we stand on these issues, what we’ve done in the past, what we have said we want to do in the future, that is all on the ballot. The future of our economy is at stake, of our education system is at stake. Fighting climate change and clean, renewable-energy jobs are at stake. LGBT equality is at stake. Equal pay for women is at stake. Actually, in the end, the American dream itself is at stake. So I want you to think about how you will feel on November 9th. [AUDIENCE MEMBER – “Happy.”]
Happy. I think that’s the right answer. But just suppose, just suppose you go to bed early. Suppose you go to bed early. Maybe you were too busy to vote or maybe you didn’t make calls or knock on doors. I want you to imagine. So you get up early on the morning of the 9th. And you log on to the news to find out, hey, what’s going on, or maybe you turn on the TV or the radio, and you hear. [AUDIENCE – “No!”]
I want you to really understand what that means for you and for all of us because I prefer for us to be motivated by what we’re for, not what we’re against. But I also think it’s prudent to imagine what could happen if we don’t do our part. And when in the future somebody asks you, maybe your kids or your grandkids, ‘What did you do when everything was on the line?’ I want you to be able to say, ‘I voted for a better, fairer, stronger America.’
Let’s go out and, in these next eight days, do everything we can to make it clear we’re going after the kind of future that includes everybody. We’re going to build this economy: new jobs, rising wages. We’re going to make college affordable and help you pay down your student debt. We are going to do what will give you the best chance for your own lives and the lives of our kids and our grandkids. So if we build that future together, we will be able to say we were part of making sure that America’s best days are still ahead of us. And we will prove, once and for all, that love trumps hate.
Thank you all.
